[+sections]

Hi all….… since co-editing is a new relationship I hope I’m not overstepping with the edit. Thanks in advance for your patience!! -Jennifer
___
The Am	                           ericans with Disabilities Act [ADA] was signed into law in 1990, guaranteeing Americans with disabilities legally protected access to employment, state and local government, public spaces, and telecommunications. It was a landmark piece of legislature for the United States, but it was not without exceptions. In particular, religious entities —including but not limited to churches, synagogues, mosques, religious schools and daycares— are exempt from the ADA. Their buildings are not required to meet accessibility codes, and there are exemptions in employment standards as well.

The entire process is more complicated than just the exemption, though, and many local faith leaders work to make practices and gathering spaces welcoming for all congregants, regardless of ability- with varying degrees of success.

Many houses of worship in the Pittsburgh area- churches, synagogues, mosques, and other religious gathering spaces- exist in buildings that predate the implementation of the ADA. This means that these spaces do not conform to the standards that apply to other public spaces for accessibility- ramps, elevators, handicapped bathrooms, and other features required in other public venues.

Bruce Pollock is an architect at <a href="https://www.rsscarch.com/">RSSC Architecture</a>, a Pittsburgh-based firm that specializes in renovating houses of worship. He explains that while these spaces are exempt from the ADA, they are not exempt from the <a href="https://www.access-board.gov/guidelines-and-standards/buildings-and-sites/about-the-ada-standards/background/adaag">ADA accessibility guidelines</a> [ADAAG] once they begin renovations. So while a 100-year old church might be completely inaccessible to someone in a wheelchair, once they decide to upgrade any part of the space, 20 percent of the renovation budget must go towards improving physical accessibility.

“They are allowed to pick and choose what satisfies that 20 percent, but they  have to keep working towards bringing the space up to code. Some get to a point where they’ve done everything but get an elevator in the building, but that would be 40 percent of their budget, so they will just install the shaft. Next time they renovate, maybe they will get the actual elevator- they have to keep incrementing towards full accessibility.”

Pollock shares that about half of congregations are aware of the ADA exemption but still concerned with accessibility for their members, and the other half are surprised they are exempt from anything. “They generally want to be accommodating.”

**************

We talked to several local congregations about the areas they are trying to be accommodating in, and where they could improve.

<b><a href="https://www.icp-pgh.org/">Islamic Center of Pittsburgh</a></b>

Alaa Shalaby is both a board member at the Islamic Center of Pittsburgh [ICP] and a parent of a 16-year old son with Down Syndrome who was raised attending ICP.

“It is very different in the Muslim community. Kids with disabilities are visible and totally part of the congregation. There is  no attempt to screen or shield or overprotect. In the kinds of communities most of our members grew up in overseas,  they are  very family-oriented- almost tribal, you are just accepted.”

Fellow board member Elaine Linn echoes this sentiment. She notes that in Egypt, many imams are blind- this gives them a special skill in memorizing the holy books. What some might see as a disability is viewed as a strength.

Rather than have a separate track for disabled congregants, their needs are woven into the fabric of the community. There are Braille texts in the library, for example. Shalaby wishes their center was more physically accessible, but finds the members do the best with what they have. “We do have a ramp that gets people into the top floor, and they can attend the prayers, but unfortunately we do have a social hall in the basement. We’ve looked into an elevator but  there is concern the building may not be good to retrofit.” This bothers him, but they are unsure of a solution. When someone in a wheelchair needs to go downstairs, “Several guys will shoulder the physical load of it, they can help, it’s not perfect but it's what we do.”

His own son enjoys the community, and has always, Shalaby feels, been wholly accepted. “People enjoy his presence.”

Along with all congregations across the region, ICP has been meeting virtually throughout  the COVID-19 pandemic. This has presented some challenges, as they work to adapt technology that they were not using before. Yet at the same time it has leveled the playing field as far as who has access to services and the Imam. Linn has enjoyed the benefits of this herself.

“I can raise my hand with a question, and I am not in the back of the room. I have access to him. Women typically worship behind the men in person.”  In addition, congregants without cars or who struggle to get to the mosque have been able to tune in. “All of our famous scholars, during the pandemic, have made themselves accessible to dialogue and listen and engage.  That is a silver lining.


<b><a href="https://www.facebook.com/pg/WelcomeHome724/about/?ref=page_internal">Homewood African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church</a></b>

Founded in 1871, the Homewood African Methodist Episcoptal Zion Church is one of the oldest congregations in Pittsburgh. Pastor Jonathan Counts and his wife are very concerned with accessibility, despite a century-old building with many limitations. They reserve space for congregants in wheelchairs near the front of the sanctuary, so that they feel included rather than relegated to the rear of the sanctuary.  While the church has one ramp, he wishes they could improve their accessibility more. “We need an elevator or a chair lift so disabled persons can enjoy the fullness of what our church offers. We also need another ramp as well. These projects will cost a lot of money but that is on our vision board to work towards. Another limitation is some people need to become more culturally aware as it relates to persons with disabilities.”

Despite limited funds, the church has committed to paying for Access transportation so that some of their disabled members can attend regularly.

The church has also been working to accommodate congregants with disabilities that are not physical. Several members have children with social and emotional disabilities. Counts, along with several parents, have created a sensory room so that all families can feel able to attend events. “They can have a safe space to play as well as work through their triggers,” is Counts’ hope.

Like ICP, the pandemic has changed things quickly. Counts has created a <a href="https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCbtVK4M4UjeTHdt1imBK2Dg">YouTube channe</a>l for the church, Zoom prayer meetings, and socially distant visits with congregants who are struggling. They are currently working on safety plans to resume in-person meetings, and hope to do so by the end of the summer, but have no firm plans yet.

<b><a href="https://lifeatvictory.com/">Victory Family Church</a></b>

Victory Family Church in Cranberry Township has become somewhat of a destination for Christian families with disabilities seeking a place to worship. The megachurch, which bought land to build their church rather than converting an existing building, was subject to all ADAAG guidelines. The space is therefore fully physically accessible to current standards.

In addition, the church has a special needs ministry, called Endless Possibilities, that has become well-known across disability circles. Tanya Riggs, who heads up the program, has families travel from all over to attend- from up to an hour away, and even from Ohio.

“We serve children with a wide range of physical, mental, and behavioral needs,” shares Riggs.  “I do not ever recall a time we have turned a child away. Prior to a child attending a service, we require the parent or caregiver to fill out an application with some general but specific questions about the child's diagnosis and how we can best minister to them.  Each parent or caregiver is also required to sign their child up for the service by Thursday evening so that I can ensure the room is properly staffed with volunteers.”

The church has a dedicated space for children that cannot be integrated into a typical Sunday school classroom, a “buddy program” or 1:1 aide program for children that can attend a classroom with supports, and a SuperMoms support group. They also strive to always have a volunteer with a medical background on hand for congregants with complex medical needs.

While the church closed in early March due to the pandemic, SuperMoms continued to meet via Zoom to offer ongoing support. Victory resumed in-person services in late June.

It is impossible to anticipate the needs of every family, and some expressed that the need to RSVP for a service is very difficult to do while also balancing their child’s ever-changing needs. One parents shared that, “With all of our kids’ needs, I do not have the mental capacity to plan that far ahead.”

Still, Riggs hopes that they can continue to adapt to the changing needs of the community. “Endless Possibilities provides a safe and dedicated environment for the children to learn about God and experience His love for them while their parents attend the adult service.  For many of our families this is the first time that they have been able to attend church together.”


<a href="https://princeofpeacepittsburgh.com/">St Mary the Mount</a>

Sitting atop Mount Washington since 1897, St. Mary the Mount is home to Pittsburgh’s Deaf Choir as well as the <a href="https://princeofpeacepittsburgh.com/deaf-council-of-diocese-of-pittsburgh">Deaf Council for the Diocese of Pittsburgh</a>.  It can be difficult for blind or deaf congregants to fully participate in worship, but Karen Shepherd, coordinator of the deaf ministry, works hard with her team to be inclusive.

The congregation makes sure that every part of the service is accessible to their deaf participants. Shepherd outlines every step they’ve taken. “Our church has a signed mass every Sunday. The distinction is that our Deaf members are also ministers at mass. We have a Deaf Lector who stands alongside the hearing Lector and signs the scripture readings. We have Deaf Eucharistic Ministers who assist with Communion. We have a Deaf Response Leader who leads the prayers and responses of the congregation so that our Deaf members are participating in the mass. In addition, we have a Deaf Choir that signs the songs that are being sung by the cantor or choir.” Friar Michael Stumpf is the Chaplain for the Deaf at St. Mary the Mount.

COVID-19 has led to some changes in the way they can provide access. Their website provides links to interpreted services at other parishes that their members have found useful, but they just don’t have the technology on hand to do any type of online interpretation on a consistent basis. “The resources on our website...are only available for those members of our deaf community who have the technology resources at home to access them. Even those who have internet access and a device on which to view the videos, have not had the IT support of their children or grandchildren who advise them and help them navigate the world of streaming.”

The church reopened the weekend of June 27-28, with ASL interpretation at those masses.

<b>Robeson family (Butler- they are okay with photos of their family)</b>

Even when houses of worship work to be accommodating, some individuals are still left out. Aimee and Steve Robeson of Butler attended a special needs program for their 10-year old son, Christian, for several years. Christian has multiple medical and cognitive disabilities, and the program provided an hour respite for his parents each week. As his needs have evolved though, it’s been more difficult to feel confident leaving him in a church setting.

“We haven’t honestly been to church in a year, between his changing needs and the pandemic. A lot of it too is finding a place where the WHOLE family fits in and that’s the hardest part.” Aimee is considering a switch to another local church that is smaller and will provide Christian with a 1:1 aide, as Sunday school classrooms can be just too stimulating for him. “But he just needs constant change like every half hour so his needs have definitely changed since we last attended a special needs ministry.”

The family thinks they have found a new place to worship as a family, which was suggested by a teacher at their son’s school who knows him and his needs well. They’ve begun to meet with a small group of parents in a Bible study, and have felt so encouraged. “ Even though the other kids are “normal”, they still interact with Christian and like being with him.” That sense of acceptance and friendship is what the family is craving- sometimes even over a highly formulated program.

Aimee also thinks that places of worship could work to focus more on adults with special needs. “I also think churches need to have a room for those adults with disabilities that cannot sit in a sanctuary.  Maybe a classroom where the service is live streamed and they can make all the noise or talk all they want.  That was voiced by a mother that I know who has a son in his 20's who cannot participate.” Aimee is aware that there is such a wide variety of disabilities and unique needs that it is impossible for congregations to anticipate all of them. Open lines of communication are key, as well as adaptability to changing needs.





Thought- this came up just today, but not sure how you feel about including a parachurch ministry, <a href="https://pittsburghcapernaum.younglife.org/">Pittsburgh has this one</a>.

[]
